---
layout: lab
title: Lab 4
subtitle: Going Around in Circles
summary: |
  This week we will reënforce our knowledge of loops and conditions.
  Some random numbers so we can create a "game" of sorts.
  Also, new for this week will be defining our own functions. We will
  specifically be manipulating some strings and arrays of strings. Two
  types of data that we deal with a lot as programmers.
released: 11:59 PM Thursday, September 20th, 2018.
due: 11:59 PM Sunday, September 30th, 2018.
---

## Part A: The Guessing Game (5pts)

Let's write a game! (It's not a fun game... we'll make fun games later, don't worry.) We will write an
interactive application. Part of that interactivity is when the computer does something... unpredictable.
(Some crashes are unpredictable, but that's not what we mean here. :)

### Random Integers

So, we will first look at how we can get a random number. In MARS, it provides us with lots of useful
system calls. This is yet another example of one it gives us. (Thankfully!) The Random Number Generator
(RNG) system call is at index `42` (somehow our only intentional usage of that number) and requires an
argument in `a0` that indicates with RNG to use (it's fine to just have it be 0) since you can
initialize multiple generators. A second argument, `a1`, specifies the upper bound of the random number.
If you give it `5`, it will give you a number inclusively in the range from 0 to 4 in `a0`.

**Note**: YES. It puts the new random number in `a0`. Why does it do this??? To make us really grumpy.
Although, if you want, you can define a function to smooth this out and ensure it returns that value
in `v0`. :)

```python
li v0, 42
li a0, 0
li a1, 5
syscall       # a0 = syscall(GET_RANDOM_INT, 0, 5);

# a0 is now a random integer
```

**Note**: As an aside, you can set the seed of the random number generator with system call `40`, which is not
strictly necessary as the RNG will be seeded by MARS randomly before each run. However, setting it to the same
seed will ensure the random numbers are always the same each run (no longer random). This can help you debug
sometimes.

### Branches and Comparisons

Recall from lecture how we deal with complex conditions. These are situations where our pseudo-code or higher-level
code contains a **logical and** or **logical or** operation:

```c
if (myVariable > 0 && myVariable < 100) {
  // myVariable is between 0 and 100 exclusive
  // BLOCK_A
}
// BLOCK_B
```

When we convert a *logical and* into assembly, we could literally convert this by creating a block for the inner code
(BLOCK_A) and having each condition jump to it and carefully jumping to BLOCK_B otherwise:

```python
  lw t0, myVariable

  bgt t0, 0, firstConditionTrue:
  b BLOCK_B
firstConditionTrue:
  blt t0, 100, BLOCK_A
  b BLOCK_B
BLOCK_A:
  // inner code
BLOCK_B:
  // after the if statement
```

However, it is often nicer to represent complex conditions as a series of *logical or* operations. We could rewrite
our condition (applying DeMorgan's Law) as such:

```c
if (!(myVariable < 0 || myVariable > 100)) {
  // BLOCK_A
}
// BLOCK_B
```

This is an equivalent operation. But, translating this directly to assembly in this form is much nicer. The
expression `myVariable < 0 || myVariable > 100` is telling us *when BLOCK_A is skipped*, which is a more fitting
idea when thinking about assembly since control flow (using `beq` and friends) is often about *skipping over*
sections of code.

```python
  lw t0, myVariable

  blt t0, 0, BLOCK_B
  bgt t0, 100, BLOCK_B
BLOCK_A:
  // inner code
BLOCK_B:
  // after the if statement
```

Much nicer.

### Your Turn

In the last lab, you've done quite a lot with conditions. Let's keep practicing our control flow with a simple
game. Your task is to write a program that generates a random number between 0 and 99 (inclusive), then
ask user to guess it. If the user gets it right, congratulate them. They have won and the game
ends. Otherwise, you should tell them whether their number is too high or too low and let them
guess again. You should say they are "warm" when the guessed number is within 10 of the correct number
and "cold" otherwise.

For example, if the number is 53, any guess that was between 44 to 62 inclusive would report being "warm."
Otherwise, it would say "You're cold."

The user is allowed to guess at most five times. If the user cannot get it right after the
fifth time, they have lost and they game ends. Make sure to prompt the user with a message and
explain whether their guess is correct, too low, too high, and also warm, cold, etc.

I believe, after doing some napkin-math, that with seven guesses you can always get the right answer. You
certainly can with eight. So, we're being a little *evil* here by making the guess count 5. >:}

The examples below show a couple of playthoughs of our game:

```
Enter a number between 0 and 99: 50
Your guess is too high.
You're cold.
Enter a number between 0 and 99: 25
Your guess is too high.
You're cold.
Enter a number between 0 and 99: 12
Your guess is too high.
You're warm!
Enter a number between 0 and 99: 8
Your guess is too low.
You're warm!
Enter a number between 0 and 99: 10
Your guess is too low.
You're warm!
You lose. The number was: 11
-- program is finished running --
```

```
Enter a number between 0 and 99: 50
Your guess is too low.
You're cold.
Enter a number between 0 and 99: 80
Your guess is too low.
You're cold.
Enter a number between 0 and 99: 95
Congratulations! You win!

-- program is finished running --
```

Submit your program as `dww9_lab4a.asm` *with your own username*.

## Part B: The Phonebook (5pts)

### Introduction to Functions

So far, our assembly programs have been simple enough that throwing all the instructions we use under the `main:` label suffices. However, this practice leads to code that is difficult to write, understand, and maintain. 

To solve this problem, we use functions. In MIPS assembly, labels are used to mark where a function begins so that we can jump to this location when we want to invoke the function. Previously, you have seen control flow instructions such as the unconditional jump instruction `j label`. Consider the following program:

```mips
.text
.globl main
main:
  j myFunction
  # do other stuff after calling myFunction...

  # program exit syscall:
  li v0, 10
  syscall

myFunction:
  # print the integer 17 using syscall 1
  li v0, 1
  li a0, 17
  syscall
```

In the above example, once we jump to the label `myFunction`, we have no way of returning to where we left off in `main`. To solve this problem, the `jal label` instruction, which stands for jump and link, jumps to the given label and also stores the location to return to in a special register `ra`. To return to wherever our function was called from, we simply us the instruction `jr`. `jr` takes one operand, which is a register containing the location we wish to jump to. Since we used `jal` to call this function, that location is saved for us in `ra`, so the instruction `jr ra` will return to the next instruction after where we initially called this function. The correct version of the above program looks like this:

```mips
.text
.globl main
main:
  jal myFunction   # jal sets the register ra to be the location of the next instruction
  # do other stuff after calling myFunction...

  # program exit syscall:
  li v0, 10
  syscall

myFunction:
  # print the integer 17 using syscall 1
  li v0, 1
  li a0, 17
  syscall

  jr ra   # returns to main
```

Note that the exit syscall (where v0 = 10) is important here because we want to stop the execution instead of letting execution continue into `myFunction` when it has not been called. Try commenting out this syscall and seeing what happens in the above program.

### Arguments and Return Values

Right now, we can only write functions that take no arguments and return no values to the caller. You have already seen the use of registers `a0`, `a1`, `a2`, and `a3` when passing arguments to syscalls. Similarly, these registers are used to pass arguments to functions:

```mips
.text
.globl main
main:
  li a0, 100
  jal addone

  # value of v0 is now 101

  li v0, 10 # terminate program
  syscall

# addone adds 1 to the given number
# a0 - number to add one to
# v0 - result of a0 + 1
addone:
  addi v0, a0, 1
  jr ra
```

It is especially important to document your functions in assembly because it can be difficult to tell what a portion of assembly code does at a glance.

**Note:** The calling function and the callee must share registers. In the future, you will learn about calling conventions and the stack, both of which will help you share registers between functions. However, for now just make sure that your callee functions don't overwrite registers that the calling function needs.

### Your Turn: The Phonebook (It's like facebook but without faces)

Does anybody even remember what a phonebook was? You see, there was this thing... where you could look up
a number in a book. And then pay, what was it, 65 cents to call them. I specifically remember it was 65
cents because it was really inconvenient. Who has two quarters a dime AND a nickle?? It was bad.

In the spirit of useless things, let's continue the trend, shall we? We will perform a phonebook style
lookup as an "online directory," yet another really bad idea, I feel. We will look up a name and return
the phone number associated with that name.

For that, we will set up our memory by declaring two string arrays:

```python
.data
	namesLength:	.word	5
	names:		.asciiz	"Mindy",	"Fred",		"Julius",	"Zandra",	"Quimby"
	phone:		.asciiz	"412-555-2332",	"412-555-5464",	"412-555-0095",	"412-555-5100",	"202-555-1165"

	namePrompt:	.asciiz "Enter a name:\n"
	notFound:	.asciiz	"Name not found.\n"
	
	found:		.asciiz "Phone Number:\n"
```

These two arrays have 5 strings within them. They are defined the same as integer (`.word`) arrays as a list of items
separated by commas. They are of the `.asciiz` type, which means they are represented as individual characters that
are one byte in size followed immediately by a byte with the value of 0. We, as we did last lab, may represent that
zero byte with the literal `'\0'`. (See `loop_ex2.asm` and friends)

In our program, we will write several functions that let us interact nicely with these arrays. In the
end, we want to be able to input a name and have the program print out the phone number associated with
that person.

Here are examples of output:

```
Enter a name:
Fred
Phone Number:
412-555-5464
-- program is finished running --
```

```
Enter a name:
Julius
Phone Number:
412-555-0095
-- program is finished running --
```

In order to do this, we will have our `main` function perform the following pseudo-code:

```c
  // read input
  syscall(PRINT_STRING, namePrompt);
  input = syscall(READ_STRING);

  // (we need to make sure we clean up input, see Note below!)

  index = 0;
  names_ptr = &names;

  // For every item in our array...
  while(index < namesLength) {
    // Does the name we are pointing at equal the input?
    if (stringEquals(names_ptr, input)) {
      // It does! So report the phone number at the same position
      number = lookup(phone, index);
      syscall(PRINT_STRING, found);
      syscall(PRINT_STRING, number);
      break;
    }

    // Go to the address of the next string in our array
    // (We add one because of that pesky null terminator)
    // Think about the memory layout to know why this works:
    names_ptr += stringLength(names_ptr) + 1;

    // Conceptionally track the current index by incrementing it
    index++;
  }

  if (index == namesLength) {
    // We did not find the name!
    // (Because we didn't break our loop in the middle)
    syscall(PRINT_STRING, notFound);
  }

  // quit
  syscall(EXIT);
```

You will notice that we have a few function calls here. These we will need to implement.
The `stringEquals` function takes two arguments (`a0` and `a1` right?) that are addresses
to two strings. It will determine if the two are equal in whichever way you'd like. Often,
`v0` is set to `0` for false and `1` for true.

The `stringLength` function will report the length of the string. (Remember your conventions!)
You can tell the length of the string by counting how many characters you find until you see
a null terminator (a byte that equals 0)

Finally, the `lookup` function will return the address of the string within the given string array
at the given index. If `lookup` is called with `phone` and 3, for instance, it should return
the memory address of `"412-555-0095"`. We can then pass that along to the print string
system call to print out our result!

You'll see the `syscall` stuff in there. That's not a function, but that instruction is conceptionally
similar to a function. It kind of makes some things confusing, but you might start finding it useful
to wrap the system calls in your own functions. Then you can copy and paste those into your programs
to make everything more consistent. Up to you!

**Note**: System call 8, which allows a person to input a string, has a note that you should be aware
of. Like many string input functions in various programming languages, this will give you literally
what a person has typed. That includes the "Enter" that was pressed! That is, the last character will
be a newline character `'\n'` which might not be something you can use, and you'll likely want to
remove it (search for it and replace it with '\0') before you check it against another string.

This is a more complex program. So remember these helpful points:

* Do the control flow first.
* Do the computational parts last.
* You probably want to tackle each function on its own before combining them into the full program.
* Test each part of your program as you go.

Submit your program as `dww9_lab4b.asm` *with your own username*.

## Collaboration Policy

You **may** work with one other person on your lab.
They may be from the other recitation, but must be from my CS447 lecture section.
You both must add a note to your written submission (at the top, very legibly) indicating who you are working with.
You both must submit your own individual lab submission, but may collaborate directly on the answer.

## Submission

Save your assembly file after making the appropriate modifications for Parts A and B and ensure it has a filename such as `dww9_lab4a.asm` and `dww9_lab4b.asm` using **your own pitt username**.

Put all files into a `.zip` file with the name `dww9_lab4.zip`, again using your own pitt username (you'd be surprised) and submit to the `cs447-submissions` Box folder I have shared with you.
Your Box folder (you have 50GB!) is accessible through <http://my.pitt.edu>.
When you see your file within the shared folder, you know you have uploaded it successfully.
If you would like to resubmit, you can copy the file in again or append a number to your filename such as `dww9_lab4_2.zip`. Although, Box should allow you to upload and replace your submission.
Let me know immediately if there are any problems submitting your work.
