---
layout: lab
title: Lab 6
subtitle: Bit flags and bitfields
summary: |
  In this lab, you will be using bit and bitfield manipulation. First, you'll use bit manipulation to convert between upper and lower case letters. Then you'll be using bitfileds to decode and encode MIPS instructions. As a "for fun" extra, you can try and make your program modify your program :).
released: 11:59 PM Thursday, October 11th, 2018.
due: 11:59 PM Sunday, October 21st, 2018.
---

## Part A: Flagging those bits (6 pts)

As we've seen in the lectures, sometimes bit are just that: bits. As such, often times we need to manipulate them individually.

There are many useful ways you can use individual bits in computation. One of such utilizations is bit flags. These are very common in hardware interfaces like the MIPS keyboard emulator you saw in a past lecture. But they are used in many other applications, such as communication protocols (e.g., TCP/IP) where each bit you use for transmission control is not useful for transmitting the message, causing what it's called communication overheads.

When these bits are used to signal an event, they are called flags. Flags usually behave as a boolean value (i.e., it is either true or false; 1 or 0 respectively).
A common usage of this technique is to track the click of a button. Such as in the MARS display and keyboard simulator code.

### Geting a bit

In general, there are two operations you need to perform to get the value of bit *n* within a number.
  1. Shift
  2. Mask

The complete operation in Java/C would be: `(number >> n) & 0x01`.

For example, let's say we want to know the value of bit 3 in the number 0x5A (0101 **1**010 in binary).
Since we are interested in bit 3, we first shift the number right (operator `>>` in Java/C) **3** times, obtaining: 0000 101**1**. Note that now the bit we are interested in is **bit 0**!

Then, we need to remove the bits to the left of bit 0. This can be achieved with the operation bitwise-and (operator & in Java/C).
The truth table of the bitwise-and operation is as follows:

| A | B | A&B |
|---|---|-----|
| 0 | 0 |  0  |
| 0 | 1 |  0  |
| 1 | 0 |  0  |
| 1 | 1 |  1  |

Note how:
1. 0&0  equals 0, and 1&0 equals 0 -> A&0 = 0
2. 0&1 equals 0 and 1&1 equals 1 -> A&1 = A

As such, when we bitwise-and a number with the number 1 (0000 0001 in binary), every bit will be reset to zero except bit 0. Bit 0 will keep the same value it held previously!
Thus the value of bit 0 is `0000 1011 & 0000 0001` which equals `0000 0001`.

The complete operation would be: `(0x5A >> 3) & 0x01`.


### Setting a bit

In general, there are two operations you need to perform to set the value of a bit within a number.
  1. Shift
  2. Or

In Java/C the operation to set bit n (i.e. to make the bit 1) would be: `number = number | (0x01 << n)`

For example, let's say we want to set the value of bit 2 in the number 0x5A (0101 1**0**10 in binary).
Since we are interested in bit 2, we first shift the value 1 left (operator `<<` in Java/C) **2** times, obtaining: 0000 0**1**00.

Then, use the operation bitwise-or (operator | in Java/C) to set the bit.
The truth table of the bitwise-or operation is as follows:

| A | B | A\|B |
|---|---|-----|
| 0 | 0 |  0  |
| 0 | 1 |  1  |
| 1 | 0 |  1  |
| 1 | 1 |  1  |

Note how:
1. 0\|0 equals zero, and 1\|0 equals 1 -> A\|0 = A
2. 0\|1 equals 0 and 1\|1 equals 1 -> A\|1 = 1

As such, if we bitwise-or the original number with the shifted 1, every bit will keep its value, except bit 2 that will become 1.
Thus the number becomes `0101 1010 | 0000 0100` which equals `0101 1110`.

The complete operation would be: `0x5A | (0x01 << 2)`.



### Resetting a bit

Resting a bit (i.e. to make a bit 0), is very similar to setting that bit.
In general, there are three operations you need to perform to set the value of a bit within a number.
  1. Shift
  2. Not
  2. And

In Java/C the operation to reset bit n  would be: `number = number & ~(0x01 << n)`

For example, let's say we want to set the value of bit 3 in the number 0x5A (0101 **1**010 in binary).
Since we are interested in bit 3, we first shift the value 1 left (operator `<<` in Java/C) **3** times, obtaining: 0000 **1**000.

Then, we use the operation bitwise-not (operator ~ in Java/C) to invert all bits. Thus obtaining: 1111 **0**111.


Finally, using the operation bitwise-and (operator & in Java/C) we can reset the bit.

Remember:
1. 0&0  equals 0, and 1&0 equals 0 -> A&0 = 0
2. 0&1 equals 0 and 1&1 equals 1 -> A&1 = A

As such, if we bitwise-or the original number with the inverted, shifted 1, every bit will keep its value, except bit 3 that will become 0.
Thus the number becomes `0101 1010 & 1111 0111` which equals `0101 0010`.

The complete operation would be: `0x5A | ~(0x01 << 3)`.

### ASCII and letters case

In the first part of this lab, we'll apply this knowledge to a mundane (but cool) problem. We'll create a program that is able to convert letters in a string to UPPER case or to lower case.

You've seen the term ascii used before in MIPS (.asciiz?) but in case you don't know what it is, let's do a small review. In a computer, surprise surprise, everything is represented as a number!!!!
Even characters!!! ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange) defines how characters translate into numbers and vice-versa. For example:

| Character | Hex | Bin |
|-|-|
| \0 (null) | 0x00 | 0000 0000|
| ... | ... | ...|
| 0 | 0x30 | 0011 0000 |
| 1 | 0x31 | 0011 0000 |
| ... | ... | ... |
| A | 0x41 | 0100 0001 |
| B | 0x42 | 0100 0010 |
| C | 0x43 | 0100 0011 |
| ... | ... | ... |
| Z | 0x5A | 0101 1010 |
| ... | ... | ... |
| a | 0x61 | 0110 0001 |
| b | 0x62 | 0110 0010 |
| c | 0x63 | 0110 0011 |
| ... | ... | ... |
| z | 0x7A | 0111 1010 |

You can find the complete table [here](http://www.asciitable.com) (I've been checking this website since 2001 (That's 17 years ago!!!! (I'm getting old... (I wasn't even 17 in 2001!!!)))).

The interesting bit about letters (pun intended!) is bit number 5!!! Check this out:
 * Take 'A' and set bit 5 to 1 -> You get 'a'!
 * Take 'a' and reset bit 5 to 0 -> You get 'A'!

**Note**: All upper case letters are between 0x41 and 0x5A and all lower case letters are between 0x61 and 0x7A.

### Now, your turn!

{:.question}
| **A.1: Write the MIPS assembly function get_bit(register: a0, bit_index: a1) that accepts two values: 1) a0 contains the "number" you want to inspect and 2) a1 contains the index of the bit we want to inspect. The function should return the value of the bit.**

{:.question}
| **A.2: Write the MIPS assembly function set_bit(register: a0, bit_index: a1) that accepts two values:1) a0 contains the "number" you want to set a bit of and 2) a1 contains the index of the bit we want to set.**

{:.question}
| **A.3: Write the MIPS assembly function reset_bit(register: a0, bit_index: a1) that accepts two values: 1) a0 contains the "number" you want to reset a bit of and 2) a1 contains the index of the bit we want to reset.**

{:.question}
| **A.4: Write the MIPS assembly function invert_case(string) that replaces every lower case letter with its upper case, and every upper case letter with it's lower case. All other characters shall not be changed.**

**E.g.**: "HelLo WorLd!!!1!" -> "hELlO wORlD!!!1!"

**Note**: Use the functions you implemented for A.1-A.3!

{:.question}
| **A.5: Write the MIPS assembly program that asks the user for a string, and inverts the case of every letter in it.**

**Submission**: You only need to submit one program named `dww9_lab5a.asm` where `dww9` is your Pitt username that provides a solution to Question A.5.

## Part B: Bitfields (4 pts)

### Why bitfields?

Sometimes we do not need a full *word/half/byte* to represent data. However, if we use a different variable to store each part of the data, then we are wasting memory.
In most modern computers this is not deemed a problem (yet, memory hogging is a thing!). However, in some embedded applications where the memory is very limited, this quickly becomes a problem.

In such cases, we use bitfields; i.e. we assign different meanings to different parts of a variable. In class we saw an example with RGB565, where a half-word was partitioned to represent the three components of a color. And we saw how MIPS instructions are themselves a bitfield.

**Aside**: this nice little video about fitting a computer game into a small memory, in particular their use of an extra bit in level design: https://youtu.be/ZWQ0591PAxM

### Getting a bitfield
Reading a bitfield is very similar to reading a single bit. The difference is that instead of masking a single bit, we need to mask multiple bits. For example, consider the color <span style="color: #ee5e5e">0xEAEB in RGB565</span> from the lecture example (the numbers on the first row are the first and last bits, inclusive, of each field):

|15 ... 11 | 10 ... 5| 4 ... 0|
|-|-|-|
| <span style="color: #FF0000">Red</span>  | <span style="color: #00FF00"> Green</span>   | <span style="color: #0000FF"> Blue </span>  |
|  <span style="color: #ee5e5e">11101</span>  | <span style="color: #ee5e5e">010111</span>   | <span style="color: #ee5e5e">01011</span>   |
|  <span style="color: #ee5e5e">0x1D</span>  | <span style="color: #ee5e5e">0x17</span>   | <span style="color: #ee5e5e">0x0B</span>   |

In order to filter the value of color Green from the color `0xEAEB` we need to know:
* What is the position of the green field?
  - This is the value you need to shift by!
* How many bits are there in the green field?
  - This will affect the mask value

The complete operation in Java/C would be: `(0xEAEB >> 5) & 0x3F`. But how do we obtain these values?
1. The green field is in bit 5, so that's the amount you need to shift by.
2. The green filed is 6-bits long, so you need to create a mask with that width: 0x3F (0011 1111 in binary)

Knowing how this is done, now the operation is the exact same as with a single bit:
1. `0xEAEB >> 5` = 0x0757 (0000 0111 0101 0111)
2. `0x0757 & 0x3F` = 0x0017 (0000 0000 0001 0111)

**Food for thought**: How does this compare with a single bit? What would happen if the green field was 1 bit long?

### Creating the bitfield

Assembling the bitfield is even easier than disassembling it. Simply offset each field accoring to their position in the bitfield, and or them together. E.g. with our RGB565: ```RGB565 = (red << 11)|(green << 5)|(blue<<0)```.



### Self analysing code

As you know, MIPS instructions are 32-bit long bitfields; where information about the instruction is encoded and packed. There are multiple types of instructions (and we will learn them later), but for now let's look at I-type instructions; the I, once again, stands for Immediate.

This type of instruction is used to encode instructions that you are now familiar with, instructions with an immediate. For example, **addi**, **ori**, **lui**, but only when using 16-bit immediates!

This is the instruction structure:
* The opcode encodes which instruction it is.
* The rs and rt encode the two registers in the instruction.
* The immediate field is ... well .. the immediate value.

|31 ... 26 | 25 ... 21| 20 ... 16| 15 ... 0|
|-|-|-|-|
| opcode | rs | rt | immediate |


E.g. `addi v0, zero, 0x1337` is 0x20021337:
1. opcode = 8
2. rs = 0 (`zero` is register 0)
3. rt = 2 (`v0` is register 2)
4. immediate = 0x1337

**Warning**: Remember that immediates are signed! So be careful if you input instructions such as `addi t0, s1, 0xC0DE`. MARS assumes you mean +0xC0DE and splits the instruction into two machine-instructions!


### Your turn


The following code is a skeleton for a program for part B. The code calls the function decode_instruction (B.1) that will decode the first instruction of function `func`, and print its fields. Then, the program calls function encode_instruction (B.2) that encodes a different instruction and prints its hexadecimal value. The remaining code simply calls the `func` function and prints its return value.

Note that the function label `func:` is a label just like the ones you declare variables with. As such, when you insert it in the code it works just like a variable would. E.g. `la a0, func`, sets the value of register a0 to the memory address of the *first instruction* of the `func` function.

```ruby
.data
  returned: .asciiz "The function returned\n"
.text
.globl main

main:
  # Decode the first instruction in function "func" (addi v0, zero, 0x1337)
  la a0, func
  jal decode_instruction

  # Encode the instruction addi v0, zero, 0x1234
  li a0, 8
  li a1, 0
  li a2, 2
  li a3, 0x1234
  jal encode_instruction

  # Print string
  la a0, returned
  li v0, 4
  syscall
  # Call function
  jal func
  # Print return value
  move a0, v0
  li v0, 34
  syscall

  # Exit
  li v0, 10
  syscall

func:
	addi v0, zero, 0x1337
	jr ra

# Prints the different fields of an I-type instruction
# decode_instruction(a0: memory address of instruction)
decode_instruction:
  # Implement B.1 here
  jr ra


# Encodes the fields of an I-type instruction and returns it
# encode_instruction(a0: opcode, a1: rs, a2: rt, a3: immediate)
encode_instruction:
  # Implement B.2 here
  jr ra

```


{:.question}
| **B.1: Using the skeleton code above, implement the decode_instruction function. The only input parameter is the memory address of the instruction. The function decodes the memory and prints each field. The expected output is as follows:**

```
opcode = 8
rs = 0
rt = 2
immediate = 0x00001337
```

**Note:** To print an hex number use syscall number 34.

**Note 2:** MARS does not allow you (by default) to access the program memory! For a good reason!!!! But we are feeling adventurous (right? :)! To be able to read the contents of the program memory, select the option in **Settings** > **Self-modifying code**.

{:.question}
| **B.2: Using the skeleton code above, implement the encode_instruction function. The inputs are the opcode, rs, rt, and the 16-bit immediate. The function encodes the fields into an instruction and returns it. The function should also print the instruction, as such:**

```
0x20021234
```

**Submission**: For Part B, you will submit a single program `dww9_lab6b.asm` where `dww9` is your Pitt username that answers both Questions B.1 and B.2.

**For fun!** Since we are doing unsafe operations, like reading the program memory, why not do it worse? Like writing the program memory??? :) After the `jal encode_instruction` instruction executes, `v0` should contain a valid instruction. This instruction is `addi v0, zero, 0x1234`. Try to replace the first instruction in `func` with this new instruction: `sw v0, func` And there you go, code that modifies itself! :)

### Collaboration Policy

You **may** work with one other person on your lab.
They may be from the other recitation, but must be from my CS447 lecture section.
You both must add a note to your written submission (at the top, very legibly) indicating who you are working with.
You both **must** submit your own individual lab submission, but may collaborate directly on the answer.

### Submission

For parts A, and B you should submit one file named `dww9_lab6a.asm`, and `dww9_lab6b.asm` respectively. The files should contain the code you wrote to solve the lab. **Make sure you replace `dww9` with your own pitt username.**
Put all files into a `.zip` file with the name `dww9_lab6.zip`, again using your own pitt username (you'd be surprised) and submit to the `cs447-submissions` Box folder I have shared with you.
Your Box folder (you have 50GB!) is accessible through <http://my.pitt.edu>.
When you see your file within the shared folder, you know you have uploaded it successfully.
If you would like to resubmit, you can copy the file in again.
Let me know immediately if there are any problems submitting your work.
