---
layout: lab
title: Lab 8
subtitle: Building Those Circuits
summary: |
 In this lab, you will be looking at some basic boolean logic problems and implementing these as circuits within Logisim. Furthermore, you will be doing some circuit analysis using Logisim as an aid.
released: 11:59 PM Thursday, October 25th, 2018.
due: 11:59 PM Sunday, November 4th, 2018.
---

<script src='https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.5/latest.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML' async></script>

## Part A: Building A Circuit

Our goal today is to build an override-capable function that compares two inputs: $$B and C$$.
We also have an input $$A$$ which, when `1` will output 1, regardless of $$B$$ and $$C$$.
When $$A$$ is not set, then the output $$Q$$ will be 1 if and only if $$B$$ and $$C$$ are both 1, and 0 otherwise.

### Truth Table

The first thing we might do to determine the eventual behavior of our circuit is to reflect that behavior in a truth table.
This table will represent each output from every possible input.
Fill in the truth table and note the reason why the output is its particular value.

| $$A$$ | $$B$$ | $$C$$ | $$Q$$ | Reason |
|-------------------------------|--------|
|   0   |   0   |   0   |       |        |
|   0   |   0   |   1   |       |        |
|   0   |   1   |   0   |   0   | B/C differ and A is 0 |
|   0   |   1   |   1   |       |        |
|   1   |   0   |   0   |   1   | A is 1 |
|   1   |   0   |   1   |       |        |
|   1   |   1   |   0   |       |        |
|   1   |   1   |   1   |       |        |
|-------------------------------|--------|

### Expression

The boolean expression is below. Normally we would determine the boolean expression from the truth table, but I'll just give it here.

$$ Q=\overline{A}BC + A\overline{BC} + A\overline{B}C + AB\overline{C} + ABC $$

Consider ways you could reduce the complexity of that circuit by hand.
If you consider the reasoning behind each output, you may infer a few ways of reducing the circuit complexity.
This can be reduced to quite a small circuit, actually.
Following a truth table approach is rather naïve, which we will solve in the next section.

However, you do not need to create the optimum circuit.
This is just for practice!

### Your Turn: Logisim Circuit

{:.question}
| **A.1**: Now, create the circuit for this boolean expression (and thus, the truth table) in Logisim like we did in class. |

You may produce your circuit in any way that reproduces the correct behavior of your truth table.

**Consider**: how complicated is this circuit in terms of the number of transistors being used?
Recall that with MOSFET transistors, like those we discussed in class, NOT gates are 2 transistors, AND and OR gates are both 6 transistors.

### Submission

You do not need to submit any work related to the truth table or boolean expression.
You will submit a single file named `dww9_lab8a.circ` with your own Pitt username.
This will contain the circuit you created for A.1.

## Part B: Optimizing Combinational Circuits

In this section, you have to develop a circuit that will compare two 2-bit binary numbers, A and B.
To help develop your circuit, use this worksheet.
We will be doing some extra work (aided by our tools!) to minimize this circuit.

### Truth Table

Populate the Y column of the truth table. If binary number A is greater than B, then the output Y is 1.
If A is less than B, then Y is 0.
If binary numbers A and B are the same, then we do not care whether Y is a 0 or a 1.
Thus, for those rows, enter an 'x'.

Here, the truth table as 4 inputs: A1, A0, B1, B0.
A1 and B1 are the most significant bits of A and B respectively.

| $$A_1$$ | $$A_0$$ | $$B_1$$ | $$B_0$$ | $$Y$$ |
|-----------------------------------------------|
|   0    |   0    |   0    |   0    |       |
|   0    |   0    |   0    |   1    |       |
|   0    |   0    |   1    |   0    |       |
|   0    |   0    |   1    |   1    |       |
|   0    |   1    |   0    |   0    |       |
|   0    |   1    |   0    |   1    |       |
|   0    |   1    |   1    |   0    |       |
|   0    |   1    |   1    |   1    |       |
|   1    |   0    |   0    |   0    |       |
|   1    |   0    |   0    |   1    |       |
|   1    |   0    |   1    |   0    |       |
|   1    |   0    |   1    |   1    |       |
|   1    |   1    |   0    |   0    |       |
|   1    |   1    |   0    |   1    |       |
|   1    |   1    |   1    |   0    |       |
|   1    |   1    |   1    |   1    |       |
|-------------------------------------------|

### K-Map

Once you have a truth table, you can fill in the corresponding K-Map in order to derive a function for Y in terms of A1, A0, B1, and B0.
The four possible values of input A go on the lefthand column and the possible values of input B go across the first row.
The inner 16 squares will represent the possible outputs Y.
The K-Map will consolidate sections of the logic which overlap, and tell you which terms can be removed from the expression.

When you have *don't-cares* in your output within the K-Map, you may consider them a 0 or a 1 whenever it is to your benefit.

| $$A_1A_0$$ \ $$B_1B_0$$ | | | | |
|-------------------------------|
|                       | | | | |
|-------------------------------|
|                       | | | | |
|-------------------------------|
|                       | | | | |
|-------------------------------|
|                       | | | | |
|-------------------------------|

Use your K-Map to determine the boolean expression for this comparator component.
Consider what the circuit likely looks like and its complexity relative to the boolean expression that would result without the K-Map (by simply following the truth table.)

### Your Turn: Logisim Circuit Analysis

Use the "Combinational Analysis" feature from Logisim to automatically draw the table, fill out the K-map, simplify, and implement the resulting functions.

**Consider**: verify Logisim's analysis by comparing its work to your own.
Logisim will show you the K-Map and the resulting expression.

{:.question}
| **B.1**: Use Logisim to perform the analysis and generate a circuit for the truth table above. |

### Submission

You do not need to submit any work related to the truth table or boolean expression.
You will submit a single file named `dww9_lab8b.circ` with your own Pitt username.
This will contain the circuit you created for B.1.

### Collaboration Policy

You **may** work with one other person on your lab.
They may be from the other recitation, but must be from my CS447 lecture section.
You both must add a note to your written submission (at the top, very legibly) indicating who you are working with.
You both **must** submit your own individual lab submission, but may collaborate directly on the answer.

### Final Submission

For parts A and B you should submit one file named `dww9_lab8a.circ`, and `dww9_lab8b.circ` respectively. **Make sure you replace `dww9` with your own pitt username.**
Put all files into a `.zip` file with the name `dww9_lab8.zip`, again using your own pitt username (you'd be surprised) and submit to the `cs447-submissions` Box folder I have shared with you.
Your Box folder (you have 50GB!) is accessible through <http://my.pitt.edu>.
When you see your file within the shared folder, you know you have uploaded it successfully.
If you would like to resubmit, you can copy the file in again.
Let me know immediately if there are any problems submitting your work.
